---
layout: distill
title: >-
  ShEPhERD: Diffusing shape, electrostatics, and pharmacophores for bioisosteric drug design
description: "ShEPhERD introduces a 3D generative diffusion model that jointly generates molecular structures and their chemical interaction profiles. The key feature of this model is that it enables interaction-conditioned generation of molecules through the diffusion denoising process, which allows to solve ligand-based design tasks like natural product mimicking, hit diversification, and fragment merging."
date: 2025-06-01
future: true
htmlwidgets: true
hidden: false

authors:
  - name: Junyong Kang

toc:
  - name: Introduction
  - name: Method
  - name: Experiments
  - name: Review

_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }
  .box-note, .box-warning, .box-error, .box-important {
    padding: 15px 15px 15px 10px;
    margin: 20px 20px 20px 5px;
    border: 1px solid #eee;
    border-left-width: 5px;
    border-radius: 5px 3px 3px 5px;
  }
  d-article .box-note {
    background-color: #eee;
    border-left-color: #2980b9;
  }
  d-article .box-warning {
    background-color: #fdf5d4;
    border-left-color: #f1c40f;
  }
  d-article .box-error {
    background-color: #f4dddb;
    border-left-color: #c0392b;
  }
  d-article .box-important {
    background-color: #d4f4dd;
    border-left-color: #2bc039;
  }
  html[data-theme='dark'] d-article .box-note {
    background-color: #333333;
    border-left-color: #2980b9;
  }
  html[data-theme='dark'] d-article .box-warning {
    background-color: #3f3f00;
    border-left-color: #f1c40f;
  }
  html[data-theme='dark'] d-article .box-error {
    background-color: #300000;
    border-left-color: #c0392b;
  }
  html[data-theme='dark'] d-article .box-important {
    background-color: #003300;
    border-left-color: #2bc039;
  }
  html[data-theme='dark'] d-article aside {
    color: var(--global-text-color) !important;
  }
  html[data-theme='dark'] d-article blockquote {
    color: var(--global-text-color) !important;
  }
  html[data-theme='dark'] d-article summary {
    color: var(--global-text-color) !important;
  }
  d-article aside * {
    color: var(--global-text-color) !important;
  }
  d-article p {
    text-align: justify;
    text-justify: inter-word;
    -ms-hyphens: auto;
    -moz-hyphens: auto;
    -webkit-hyphens: auto;
    hyphens: auto;
  }
  d-article aside {
    border: 1px solid #aaa;
    border-radius: 4px;
    padding: .5em .5em 0;
    font-size: 90%;
  }
  d-article aside p:first-child {
      margin-top: 0;
  }
  d-article details {
    border: 1px solid #aaa;
    border-radius: 4px;
    padding: .5em .5em 0;
  }
  d-article summary {
    font-weight: bold;
    margin: -.5em -.5em 0;
    padding: .5em;
    display: list-item;
  }
  d-article details[open] {
    padding: .5em;
  }
  d-article figure {
    padding: 1em 1em 0;
  }
  d-article details[open] summary {
    border-bottom: 1px solid #aaa;
    margin-bottom: .5em;
  }
  html[data-theme='dark'] d-article blockquote {
    border-left-color: #f1c40f;
  }
  @media (min-width: 768px) {
  .l-gutter:has(> aside) {
      height: 0px;
    }
  }
  @media (min-width: 1025px) {
    d-article d-contents {
      height: 0px;
    }
  }

---
# Introduction
Ligand-based drug design aims to develop small molecules that mimic the 3D interaction profiles (shape, electrostatics, pharmacophores) of known actives.
Traditionally, this involves similarity-based virtual screening using shape or electrostatic scores. 
However, this method is limited to searching existing libraries, often fails on flexible molecules, and is computationally expensive.

ShEPhERD (Shape, Electrostatics, and Pharmacophore Explicit Representation Diffusion) addresses this by introducing a generative model that learns to jointly generate 3D molecules and their interaction profiles from noise.
This allows to conditional generation of molecules with injecting specific chemical information into the generation process (inpainting).

---

# Method

ShEPhERD introduces a generative model to sample chemically diverse molecules as 3D molecular graph, conditioned on interaction profiles defined by molecular **shape**, **electrostatics**, and **pharmacophores** (features of a molecule that are required for it to bind to a biological target). The model learns a **joint denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM)** over molecular graphs and their interaction profiles. We briefly summarize (1) the representations of variables, (2) similarity scoring functions, (3) the joint diffusion process and (4) the denoising network architecture.


## 1. Molecular and Interaction Representations

### 1.1 3D Molecular Graph ($$x_1$$)
The base molecular representaion is defined as a 3D graph.

Each molecule is defined as:
- $$ a \in \{H, C, N, O, ...\}^{n_1} $$: atom types, one-hot encoded
- $$ f \in \{-2, -1, 0, 1, 2\}^{n_1} $$: formal charges
- $$ C \in \mathbb{R}^{n_1 \times 3} $$: atomic coordinates
- $$ B \in \{0, 1, 2, 3, 1.5\}^{n_1 \times n_1} $$: bond orders (includes aromatic bonds)

Note that categorical features are relaxed to continuous embeddings for diffusion model.

### 1.2 Shape ($$x_2$$)

The molecular **shape** is represented as a **surface point cloud** $$ S_2 \in \mathbb{R}^{n_2 \times 3} $$, sampled from the **solvent-accessible surface (SAS)** of the molecule.

### 1.3 Electrostatics ($$x_3$$)

Electrostatic potential (ESP) is encoded as:
- $$ S_3 \in \mathbb{R}^{n_3 \times 3} $$: surface points (same as shape sampling)
- $$  v \in \mathbb{R}^{n_3} $$: ESP values computed from the per-atom partial charges of $$x_1$$

Each point's potential is computed via Coulombic summation (see Appendix).

### 1.4 Pharmacophores ($$x_4$$)

Pharmacophores are represented as:
- $$  p \in \mathbb{R}^{n_4 \times N_p} $$: one-hot pharmacophore types ($$N_p$$ types)
- $$  P \in \mathbb{R}^{n_4 \times 3}  $$: pharmacophores’ coordinates
- $$  V \in \{\mathbb{S}^2, \mathbf{0}\}^{n_4} $$: directional unit vectors (for directional types of pharmacophores only)

Directional types include hydrogen bond donors/acceptors, aromatic rings, and halogen bonds.

---

## 2. 3D Similarity Scoring Functions

ShEPhERD develop own 3D similarity scoring functions for shape, ESP, and Pharmacophore. These functions natively operate on the molecular representations in this paper.
Similar to the traditional scoring functions, they develop Gaussian-overlap based Tanimoto similarity scores across different domains.

### 2.1 General Form
The authors define Tanimoto similarity from the overlap of two point clouds:
$$
\text{sim}^*(Q_A, Q_B) = \frac{O_{A,B}}{O_{A,A} + O_{B,B} - O_{A,B}}, \quad
O_{A,B} = \sum_{a \in Q_A} \sum_{b \in Q_B} w_{ab} \left(\frac{\pi}{2\alpha}\right)^{3/2} e^{-\frac{\alpha}{2}\|\mathbf{r}_a - \mathbf{r}_b\|^2},
$$

where each point $$\mathbf{r}_k$$ from a point cloud $$Q$$ is assigned an isotropic Gaussian.
As these similarities are sensitive to $$SE(3)$$ transformations, the final similarity is computed as the maximum of $$\text{sim}^*$$ under the transformation.

### 2.2 Shape Similarity

- Uses either **volumetric** atom centers or **surface** point clouds
- Calibrated to volumetric baseline with tuned $$ \alpha $$ values

### 2.3 ESP Similarity

Adds exponential term on ESP values:
$$
w_{ab} = \exp\left(-\frac{(v_a - v_b)^2}{\lambda}\right)
$$

### 2.4 Pharmacophore Similarity

Type-aggregated cosine-weighted similarity:
$$
w_{ab;m} = \begin{cases}
1 & \text{non-directional} \\
\frac{\vec{V}_a^\top \vec{V}_b + 2}{3} & \text{directional}
\end{cases}
$$

---
## 3. Diffusion Process and Denoising Network Architecture

### 3.1 Diffusion Process and Denoising model

A joint diffusion model over $$ X = (x_1, x_2, x_3, x_4) $$ is trained, following the DDPM formulation.

Forward noising process is defined by
$$
x^{(t)} = \alpha_t x^{(t-1)} + \sigma_t \epsilon, \quad \epsilon \sim \mathcal{N}(0, I),
$$
where $$t$$ denotes the (discretized) diffusion timestep.

and coordinate and directional features are handled with centering and normalization.
The reverse process involves the denoising model output $$\hat{\epsilon}^{(t)}$$:

$$
x^{(t-1)} = \frac{1}{\alpha_t} \left(x^{(t)} - \frac{\sigma_t^2}{\sigma_t \alpha_t} \hat{\epsilon}^{(t)}\right) + \sigma_t \frac{\sigma_{t-1}}{\sigma_t} \epsilon'.
$$


To build geometry-aware denoising architecture, the authors uses **EquiformerV2**<d-cite key="liao2024equiformerv"></d-cite> built on $$SE(3)$$-equivariant **E3NNs**<d-cite key="geiger2022e3nn"></d-cite> with 3 components: embedding modules, joint module, then the denoising module.

### 3.2 Embedding Module
Each $$ (x_i^t,t)$$ is encoded into:
- Invariant scalar representation: $$  z_i^t = \in \mathbb{R}^{n_i \times d} $$
- Equivariant vector representations: $$  \tilde{z}_i^t \in \mathbb{R}^{n_i \times 3 \times d} $$
using EquiformerV2.

### 3.4 Joint Module

- Local interaction: use another EquiformerV2 module to residually update each nodes’ latent features  $$ (z_i^t, \tilde{z}_i^t) $$.
- Global interaction: Sum-pool the updated vector node features (by local intercation), concatenate them, and then embed with an equivariant feed-forward network. Then apply equivariant tensor products between this vector global feature with the l=0 embedding of $$t$$.
- Add the global interaction output to the local node embeddings.

### 3.5 Denoising Module

- Scalar predictions via MLPs
- Vector predictions via equivariant feed-forward networks
- Bonds predicted symmetrically from node pairs
The network is trained by noise prediction, and the authors train the model to learn $$P(x_1)$$, $$P(x_1, x_2)$$, $$P(x_1, x_3)$$, $$P(x_1, x_4)$$, and $$P(x_1, x_3, x_4)$$.


### 3.6 Sampling
After training the denoising module, we can perform unconditional/conditional generation.
Unconditional sampling starts from Gaussian prior, apply DDPM denoising, and then discretize the final values.
For the conditional sampling, the authors utilize inpainting. They fix noisy interaction profiles $$  x_2, x_3, x_4 $$ during denoising and only molecule structure $$  x_1  $$ is updated to match the interaction constraints.


---

# Experiments

ShEPhERD is trained and evaluated on two custom datasets:
- **ShEPhERD-GDB17**: 2.8M molecules with ≤17 non-H atoms, optimized in gas phase.
- **ShEPhERD-MOSES-aq**: 1.6M MOSES molecules with ≤27 non-H atoms, optimized in implicit water.

## 1. Unconditional Joint Generation

**Objective**: Assess ShEPhERD’s ability to jointly generate 3D molecule, by evaluating whether generated interaction profile matches the true interaction
profile of the generated molecule.

**Results**: Comparing the similarities $$\text{sim}_{surf}$$, $$\text{sim}_{ESP}$$, and $$\text{sim}_{pharmacophore}$$ between the
true profiles of the generated molecules and those of random molecules from the dataset, ShEPhERD’s generated profiles have enriched similarities to the true profiles in all cases. 


## 2. Interaction-Conditioned Generation

**Objective**: Generate molecules from fixed interaction profiles via inpainting.

### Results:
- While >94% of generated molecules have graph similarity <0.2, these molecules show high 3D similarity over random dataset baselines (Figure 3 shows qualitative examples for directional pharmacophores)

## 3. Natural Product Ligand Hopping

**Objective**: A downstream task to mimic complex natural products with drug-like molecules.

### Setup:
- 3 complex natural products from COCONUT
- Conditional generation:$$P(x_1, x_3, x_4)$$.
- Baselines:
  - Virtual screening (2,500 dataset samples)
  - REINVENT (10,000 samples with reward = 3D similarity)


### Results:
- ShEPhERD generates simpler structures with high 3D similarity
- Outperforms REINVENT in top-1 similarity, with fewer samples and no optimization

## 4. Bioactive Hit Diversification

**Objective**: Diversify chemical structures (PDB ligands) while preserving their interaction profiles.

### Setup:
- Generate 500 samples using $$P(x_1, x_3, x_4)$$.
- Vina docking scores as weak surrogate for bioactivity


### Results:
- ShEPhERD improves top-1 Vina scores in 6/7 cases

## 5. Bioisosteric Fragment Merging

**Objective**: Merge 13 fragment hits into a single ligand based on their combined interaction profiles.

### Setup:
- Use pharmacophores and ESP from 13 fragments as the condition.
- Generate 1,000 candidates with $$P(x_1, x_3, x_4)$$.

### Results:
- ShEPhERD produces top-10 molecules with good alignment and low SA score <d-cite key="sascore"></d-cite> (simplicity metric)


## 6. Summary
ShEPhERD consistently generates novel, unique molecules with high fidelity to interaction profiles. In ligand-based downstream tasks, even without knowing the protein, generated molecules maintain or improve binding scores.

---

# Review

## Pros
1. This paper explicitly models not only molecular geometry but also interaction-driving features (ESP, pharmacophores) in a symmetry-aware framework.
which is a novel modeling approach for 3D molecular generation.
2. Thanks to the joint modeling, conditional generation performance in several downstream tasks surpasses baseline methods.
3. Technical novelty on modeling representations and networks for various interaction features and designing custom scoring functions.

## Cons

1. While the paper provides significant improvement in the field of conditional generation of molecules, some experimental results shows low success rate and consistency, for instance, in pharmacophore generation.
2. While useful for ligand-based design, structure-based scenarios still require separate adaptation.
3. There are many technical engineering in the paper which makes readers hard to follow up, while these do not diminish the core methodological advance. 






